# Blood-Cell-Classification
The problem of classifying the abnormal cells manually under microscope is that it consumes time, working on huge number of samples manually is burdensome which leads to poor result quality with unnecessary medication leading to life trait to the patient and cause eye fatigue to the technicians. We can categorize white blood cells in two main groups mononuclear cells and granulocytes according to the shape of their nucleus. With observing these two groups under a microscope we can further classify them into five subclasses (monocytes, lymphocytes, neutrophils, basophils and eosinophils) based on their size, structure and colour. The goal of this project is to classify the abnormal blood cells based on deformed shaped WBCs image by using CNN and Deep learning.
Related Work
This section reviews the literature for white blood cell classification using the conventional laboratory procedures, digital image processing, machine learning and deep learning techniques
Manually classifying white blood cells may lead to delay and to many statistical errors like sampling error which will result in poor accuracy of the results and significant level of observer variation in grading. Cytometry and automatic counting machines are used by some laboratories for classification of white blood cells. But these techniques can only quantitatively count and classify the white blood cells not qualitatively
In general, there are generally two different approaches in the automated counting process of blood cells. They are the image processing approach and the machine learning approach.
Previous identification systems for WBCs consist of successive dependent stages; pre-processing, segmentation, feature extraction, feature selection, and classification. There is a real need to employ deep learning methodologies so that the performance of previous WBCs identification systems can be increased.

# DATASET
We got our required dataset from Kaggle. The dataset contains 12500 augmented images of Blood Cells with accompanying cell type labels. This dataset is accompanied by an additional dataset containing the original 410 images (pre-augmentation) as well as two additional subtype labels (WBC vs WBC) and bounding boxes for each cell in each of these 410 images (JPEG).



# Methods
Architecture of convolutional neural networks
CNNs are digital image processing systems with the ability to resolve and evaluate the details of an input image. Here, a CNN is exploited to distinguish between the shape characteristics of WBCs in flow and to detect undefined outliers which occur due to channel imperfections, membrane damages, cell-cell-interactions, shape transitions or transients, and optical ambiguities. They consist of an image input layer followed by a certain number of subsequent convolution stages and provide so-called interconnected layers forming an artificial neural network to combine the convolution data in a final stage before the information is fed to the output layer nodes. Several no. of models are trained with different activation functions and with variable size of output filters to each convolutional layer to check how the small changes in model layers affects the classification and model accuracy.
In first CNN model we used three convolutional layers with max pooling layers of pool size 2*2 connected to each convolutional layer. Then flatten layer is added with the convolutional layer to transform the two-dimensional matrix of features generated by convolutional layer into a vector that can be fed into a fully connected neural network classifier layer. Two fully connected dense layer are formed with 128 and 4 classifiers respectively so that it will output the result in the form of classification model to classify four types of blood cells. The second model consists of three convolutional layer each attached with same kind of MaxPooling layer and followed by flatten and dense layers. Third model is as same as first model with same number of parameters used but it also consists of dropout layer to prevent the model from overfitting as dropout works by randomly setting the outgoing edges of hidden units(neurons that make up hidden layers) to 0 at each update of the training phase. 
Convolutions are linear operations. Thus, CNNs could easily be contracted to a simple linear signal processing system if there were no non-linearities involved. Indeed, the usage of non-linearities resolving higher order dependencies in between the characteristics of a set of distinct input images is one of the key ideas behind neural networks.

# Results

CNN Model 1	
88.99

CNN Model 2	
98.77

CNN model 3	
94.99

From the above data, we can conclude that CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) model 2 gives out the best accuracy (i.e., 98.77) in classification of blood cells images. In model 2, four convolutional layers are used which is more than the convolutional layers used in other models (model1 and model3 consist of three convolutional layers). Also, the total number of parameters generated in model 2 is less than parameters generated in two other models.

# Conclusion
In this study, geometrical features were extracted from microscopic blood images and a feature vector composed of different parameters was formed. This feature vector is used as the input parameter for three CNN models formed in different ways using different number of convolutional layers with different activation functions followed by layers such as flatten layer, dropout layer, dense layers for the classifications. When the performance of classification of leukocyte cells is evaluated, it is seen that the highest success rate in all datasets and in all conditions belongs to CNN model (with accuracy 98.77). In order to further improve the classification success, the algorithm can be made more powerful by methods such as Bagging, Boosting or Bootstrapping.


